---
title: "Multimodal Interactive Assistance for the Digital Collection of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures"
collection: publications
---
category: "bookchapters"

permalink: /publication/2024-10-16-BC4
excerpt: 'This paper presents an innovative approach to improve the collection of patient-reported outcome measures in clinical settings through a multimodal interactive assistance system. The system addresses both technical and organizational challenges, while ensuring user-friendliness with features like voice input to ease the cognitive burden on patients. Developed through a participatory process with significant input from a patient advisory board.'
date: 2024-10-16
venue: 'Berlin Universities Publishing'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-20425'
citation: 'Hillmann, S., Ashrafi, N., Graf, P., Harnisch, P. L., Jansen, E., Marquard, M. &amp; Voigt-Antons, J.-N. (2024). Multimodal Interactive Assistance for the Digital Collection of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures. In Herrmann, W. J., Leser, U., Möller, S., Voigt-Antons, J.-N., Gellert, P. (Eds.) (2024). The digitalization of healthcare for older adults. - Digitalization as an answer to substantial challenges in our healthcare system. Berlin: Berlin Universities Publishing. https://doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-20425'
---

<a href='https://doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-20425'>Download paper here</a>

This paper presents an innovative approach to improve the collection of patient-reported outcome measures in clinical settings through a multimodal interactive assistance system. The system addresses both technical and organizational challenges, while ensuring user-friendliness with features like voice input to ease the cognitive burden on patients. Developed through a participatory process with significant input from a patient advisory board.

Recommended citation: Hillmann, S., Ashrafi, N., Graf, P., Harnisch, P. L., Jansen, E., Marquard, M. & Voigt-Antons, J.-N. (2024). Multimodal Interactive Assistance for the Digital Collection of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures. In Herrmann, W. J., Leser, U., Möller, S., Voigt-Antons, J.-N., Gellert, P. (Eds.) (2024). The digitalization of healthcare for older adults. - Digitalization as an answer to substantial challenges in our healthcare system. Berlin: Berlin Universities Publishing. https://doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-20425